---
title: "About"
description: "Cloud & DevOps Engineer"
author_image : "images/about/author.jpg"
author_signature : "images/about/signature.png"
draft: false
---
Hi! I am Asa, and currently I am pursuing a master's degree in the field of Cloud and Network infrastructures along with a minor in Business and startup ecosystems. It's a joint degree designed by European Institute of Technology(EIT) which offers mobility program across Europe. I studied first year of my degree at Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland and currently I am studying my final year at KTH Royal institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.   

“The only thing permanent in life is change” - The quote by Heraclitus holds true for the world of Computer Science where once novel ideas are no longer a novelty. It is this ever-changing definition of novelty that entices me to the field of Cloud and Networking and gives me a deep sense of professional pride. I feel it is my turn to pitch in and contribute something of value to the field.

Ever since I was in high school, I was deeply fascinated with computers and how they connected to form a web that is wide enough to fit the entire world in it. Shortly after reading “Computer Networks” by Tanenbaum and Wetherall, the bible for Networking infrastructures, I was enthralled to know more about Networking and how the internet works. From there onwards, my expedition to explore in-depth knowledge about computers began. Fostering the same passion, I completed my higher secondary education in Science and Technology with flying colours. Because of my descent grades in high school, I got selected for a scholarship in “Maharashtra Institute Of Technology, Pune(S.P.P.U)”, now known as ‘MIT World Peace University’, a widely reputed University in India. The extensive four-year program not only honed my logical and analytical skills but also my programming skills in C, C++, Java, Python and SQL. I studied various subjects like Theory of Computation, Operating Systems Design and Administration, Mobile and Pervasive Computing, Computer Networks to learn the basics of computers. Of course, they only scratched the surface of this immense body of knowledge but were enough to get an idea of how vast the field could be. 

During my third year, I participated in quite a few events and workshops which imparted great knowledge about Cisco devices used for routing and switching in the networking domain. I started interning at ‘Cresco Mobility Solutions’, a start-up company to explore more about wireless networks and android applications. It was a much-needed opportunity for me to acquaint myself with android application development along with Networking. Under the guidance of the CEO, Mr Jigar Shah, I developed an Android application to keep track of employee attendance by managing dynamic network connections in office premises. That is when I realized that, Programming is an art, it’s a logic-based form of creativity.

During my Senior year, I wanted to harness my programming expertise to engender a large scale android application which can serve a greater purpose in the field of technology. Hence, we as a team of three started working on a health-care product titled “User-owned health management application as a personal health assistant on Android platform”, sponsored by Ishnatek Pvt. Ltd. The application mainly focused on providing patients with a tool to manage the central storage repository to maintain health-related data and medical documents relating to a person and/or his family. Being a novel and innovative idea, it was well-received by the industry professionals. We also played around with the idea of converting this into a full-scale product in itself.

My academic grades and a keen understanding of Networking domain led me to bag a well-paying and enviable job at ‘Great Software Laboratories Pvt.Ltd.’. In this company, I got the opportunity to work on different cloud platforms such as OpenStack, AWS, GCP, etc. I flourished as a DevOps Engineer under the wings of my lead and my fellow engineers. I got the opportunity to work on a variety of projects which involved interaction with foreign clients and an understanding of their requirements clearly. The first project I worked on was with a Taiwanese company and it involved designing Network topologies on cloud platforms and deployment strategies such as Docker and Kubernetes, which are some of the cutting-edge technologies in the cloud era. The project received immense appreciation, with the CEO praising the efforts and innovations in the product.

After working at the firm for three years, I realized that there are quite a few uncharted waters for me in the field of Cloud and Networking Infrastructure, such as blockchains, distributed ledger applications and cybersecurity. I decided to look for courses that can give me in-depth knowledge about these unexplored territories and I came across EIT digital master school. The combined master's degree in the domain that aligns with my previous work at two different universities with a full-time scholarship enticed me to move to Europe and build a profound understanding of Networking.

